Add a pool configurability design proposal. (#942)
metallb/metallb: design/pool-configuration.md

## Summary

Following @johananl's initiative in [this issue](https://github.com/metallb/metallb/issues/630)
this enhancement tries to collect and classify various configuration enhancement requests
requested over time.

## Motivation

The way advanced users consume MetalLB is evolving and exposed a need for more complex configuration.
For example, the need for isolation and multi-tenancy induced requests for being able to advertise some specific address pools from a subset of the nodes, or
to allocate them only to a specific namespace, to mention some.

### Goals

* Collect and classify all the requests coming from different issues, in order to have a better understanding
  and an organic implementation, avoiding focus on and implementation of only a specific feature, risking causing conflicts afterwards.
* Provide a list of the possible configuration enhancements and highlight dependencies and conflicts among them (if any).
* Highlight the cases where the solution must be BGP or L2 specific

### Non-Goals

* Covering only a specific use case.
* Providing a L2 only or BGP only solution where the problem might be expressed in a more generic way.

## Proposal

> For all the IPs belonging to an address pool, we need to address three main configuration degrees:

Reviewer: I am not sure an IP is the "central" entity we should think about for all cases.

For example, in most commercial routers, controlling which IP prefixes are advertised to which BGP peers is done at the **peer** level, not the IP level. You typically attach a "route map" to a BGP peer. The route map is basically a policy document which defines which prefixes known to the local BGP process are allowed to be advertised to the peer to which the route map is attached.

AFAICT we have the following concerns in MetalLB:

1. Which speaker nodes should announce a prefix. This would be the equivalent of selecting which routers to apply a configuration to.
2. Which BGP peers to advertise a prefix to. This would be the equivalent of restricting BGP advertisements using a route map.
3. Which IP to allocate to which service. This would be the equivalent of an IPAM policy that's **completely unrelated** to advertisement.

I'd consider rephrasing as follows:

>MetalLB deals with the following concerns:

Then I would rephrase the list to be more generic as follows:

- Controlling which speaker nodes advertise a prefix.
- Controlling which peers a speaker node should advertise a prefix to.
- Controlling which IPs are allocated to which services.

Lastly, see my [note](https://github.com/metallb/metallb/pull/942/files#r773898754) below.

Author: Sounds clearer, will apply your suggestion. I'll reply on the bgp side on the other comment below.

* Announcing the IP from a subset of nodes
* Announcing the IP to a subset of BGP neighbors

> * Using a given AddressPool only for a subset of services

Reviewer: Actually we seem to have **two** different concerns here:

1. Ensuring service X receives an IP from address pool Y.
2. Ensuring no other service besides X receives an IP from address pool Y.

The 1st concern is independent from the 2nd: I may want to ensure service X gets its IP from pool Y but I don't care if other services also get their IPs from pool Y.

Author: Makes sense, I think this will be covered by your rephrasing above. It doesn't add much value to split the item into two.

In order to be able to select them, the current proposed structure

```yaml
from-annotations:
      - my-asn: example.com/local-asn
        peer-asn: example.com/remote-asn
        peer-address: example.com/address
```

will need to be extended with a name field (as much as the `peers` substructure) so it can be selected.

### Conflicts with the FRR implementation

All the BGP changes will happen from a "behavioural" point of view. Where needed, the changes will reflected in both the native and the new implementation.

### Not covering all the angles

The risk of not covering all possible cases / permutations is still there. For example, the proposed solution leverages pool customization to provide a
way to set per service specific properties (i.e. define an AddressPool with bgp-communities and associate it to a single service), while a user may want to
set custom properties only on one single service.

That aside, this proposal covers the majority of the issues that were raised by the users (multiple times), and it won't prevent to add a finer level of configuration
if ever comes the need.

## Design Details

### Announcing the IP from a subset of nodes

> Extending the address-pool object with an optional node selector field is straightforward:

Reviewer: Consider the following use case:

- **IP X** is allocated to some service.
- **Node A** is peered with **routers 1 and 2**. **Node B** exists as well.
- I want to advertise IP X **from node A** (and not node B) but **only to router 1**.

I'm not sure we can handle this use case in the proposed design, but even if we can, I'd say the following design would be more "natural" when thinking about how this kind of policy is handled by commercial routers:

We apply a policy **to node A**. This policy filters BGP advertisements to routers 1 and 2, allowing IP X to be advertised to router 1 but not to router 2.

"Translating" the above to MetalLB terms, I'd consider putting the "filtering" logic in the **peer**:

```yaml
    peers:
    - peer-address: 10.0.0.1
      peer-asn: 64501
      my-asn: 64500
      name: foo
      allowed-prefixes:
      - 172.16.0.1/32
      - 192.168.1.0/29
```

In case you want to have two different policies for node A and node B *for the same peer 10.0.0.1*, you would define **two peer sections**, each with a different node selector, with the same `peer-address` and different `allowed-prefixes` clauses.

WDYT?

Author: The scenario you are describing is covered with the next section, "Announcing the IP to a subset of BGP neighbors".

The first thought that comes into my mind is that this won't work with L2, and a lot of users asked for this feature because in L2 only one node advertises and different nodes may be connected to different networks.

Said that, I am a bit torn about this. On one hand, it's more flexible and near to what it will look like in FRR.

On the other hand, it feels a bit too low level. Users will have to configure the addresspools, and then go manually and copy the cidrs to the peers. It feels more natural to say "I want this peer to advertise this pool only" (or as per my version, "I want this pool to be advertised only to these peers") because the pool is the higher level object the prefixes come from.

I saw value in having the addresspool the central entity of our configuration. Together with service mapping logic, it would allow metallb to be used in multi tenant scenarios that require different configurations for different tenants. 

With this, it would be doable, but more fragmented and error prone because we'd loose the natural association with the pool and with the namespace.

Would that work if `allowed-prefixes` accepts also strings and in that case the semantic is that it's the name of a pool? Or having an additional `allowed-pools` field together with that (maybe too many knobs)? We'd loose the addressPool being the center of the configuration, but we'd still be able to provide a higher level abstraction that will reduce configuration errors.

Reviewer: You've raised good points.

Following the discussion in the community meeting and since we're considering implementing this design using CRDs anyway, I think the best approach may be to separate the concerns of **allocating** IPs and **advertising** IPs. If we take this approach, the following happens:

- An address pool object becomes protocol-agnostic and specifies only allocation-related params
- Either we create a layer 2 equivalent of `peer` and control prefix filtering there (by referencing address pools), **or** we add a protocol-agnostic abstraction, say `kind: Advertisement`, which controls whether or not to advertise a prefix to a given router (and then we don't need a `peer` equivalent for layer 2 as long as there are no APR-specific knobs to tweak).

Author: Yep, I'll rework this proposal to include a re-design of the data structures (I feel like it won't change to much whether we implement them as sections of the configmap or as separate crds), so we can iterate from there (next year :P ).

> # Address Pool configuration options

Reviewer 2: Just a general question for maintainers. Do we have a naming convention for design proposals?

Reviewer 3: AFAIK, no. But maybe we can move ones already implemented to a subdir, assume most will be implemented so this will still be manageable?

# Address Pool configuration options

## Summary

Following @johananl's initiative in [this issue](https://github.com/metallb/metallb/issues/630)

> this enhancement tries to collect and classify various configuration degrees requested during time.

Author: received over time? Pardon my English, not sure what to change here :P

> this enhancement tries to collect and classify various configuration degrees requested during time.

Reviewer: Ah, right. Got it now. Yes, "received over time" is better.

## Motivation

The way advanced users consume MetalLB is evolving and exposed a need for more complex configuration.
For example, the need for isolation and multi-tenancy induced requests for being able to advertise some specific address pools from a subset of the nodes, or
to allocate them only to a specific namespace, to mention some.

### Goals

* Collect and classify all the requests coming from different issues, in order to have a better understanding
  and an organic implementation, avoiding to focus on and to implement only a specific feature, risking to cause conflicts afterwards.
* Provide a list of the possible configuration enhancements, and to highlight dependencies and conflicts between each other (if any).
* Highlight the cases where the solution must be BGP or L2 specific

### Non-Goals

* Covering only a specific use case.
* Providing a L2 only or BGP only solution where the problem might be expressed in a more generic way.

## Proposal

> For each ip of an address pool, we need to address three main points:

Reviewer: This phrasing is ambiguous IMO.

Let IP A and IP B be IPs in address pool X. Which of the following is true?

1. IP A can be allocated/advertised separately from IP B. For example, the user can decide that IP A be advertised only from node A whereas IP B be advertised from all available nodes.
2. IP A and IP B are always treated the same way. IOW, the policy options which control IP allocation/advertisement apply to **all IPs** in a pool.

Personally, I think option 2 makes the most sense. If you want to treat an individual IP in a special way, you can always define a pool with just that IP.

Author: Yep, I agree and that's what I tried to express.
I'll rephrase to make it clear that any behavior we introduce will be consistent for all the IPs of a given pool.

> * Which nodes must be advertised as destinations of that ip

Author: Will change that.

> * Where / to whom the ip address must be advertised to

Author: Agree. I wasn't sure when I started writing this if we wanted to have some kind of filtering in ARP advertisement or not, ended up saying we don't in a following sectoin. Will change it.

> * Where / to whom the ip address must be advertised to

Reviewer: ARP is a broadcast-based layer 2 protocol. While it's technically possible e.g. to refuse to provide an ARP reply to a specific source MAC, doing so would be weird IMO since a security policy usually isn't enforced at that layer.

* How to allocate that ip to a given service

> The general idea of this proposal is that these degree of configuration are all related to the AddressPool object, and

Reviewer 2: nit: degree -> degrees

that these configurations are independent between each other.

### Node / Service IP mapping

The most common request is being able to associate a given pool to a subset of nodes (which translates to selectively announce a subset of speakers to announce the ip from).

This covers use cases where different set of nodes are exposed to different subnets, and the loadbalancer IP can be reached only via a subset of the nodes.

[<img src="./images/ip_per_node.svg" width="400"/>](./images/ip_per_node.svg)

> This was raised in the following issues / PRs:

Reviewer 2: @fedepaol Good work in collating all of these.

* [Issue: Layer2 Different subnets(label for LB, check for interface](https://github.com/metallb/metallb/issues/737)
* [Issue: Look into a generic pool <> node affinity mechanism](https://github.com/metallb/metallb/issues/630)
* [PR: MetalLB speakers working on a subset of nodes in layer2](https://github.com/metallb/metallb/pull/613)
* [Issue: Annotate nodes with address pool/weighted address pools](https://github.com/metallb/metallb/issues/941)

The following issues also fall in the same "speaker announcement logic" category:

Service with external backends

* [Issue: LoadBalancer service is not accessible using external IP, when endpoints (with a pod inside the cluster) is created manually](https://github.com/metallb/metallb/issues/717)
* [Issue: Announce route for nodeless endpoints](https://github.com/metallb/metallb/issues/646)

### IP Announcement Targets

Currently, an IP assigned to a Service is advertised to all the possible destinations from all the nodes.
The only exception is the BGP peer [node selector](https://metallb.universe.tf/configuration/#limiting-peers-to-certain-nodes).

> Here, we suggest to extend the configuration logic with a protocol dependent way to select the target(s) of the announcement.

Reviewer 2: independent?

Reviewer 2: Do you know why we can't use the BGP method with Layer2?

Author: Not sure I understand the question here.
This part is about choosing the targets of the advertisement, which (I believe) is protocol dependent because of the different nature of the "targets" in the BGP and the L2 context.

The part above (node / addresspool mapping) is meant to be protocol independent, and as such the one below (pool / service association)

Reviewer 2: Yeah and reading over this, I agree. I thought you were proposing doing something with L2 as well (selectively choosing interfaces) but you say below it wasn't included in this proposal. Do we think we will ever need or want to do this?

We could think about selectively choose what interfaces / clients send the replies / broadcasts to, but given the locality nature of the L2 mode, plus the fact that
no issues were raised for this scenario, this option won't be covered in this proposal.

#### No announcement

This third (currently not implemented) mode raised in [this discussion](https://github.com/metallb/metallb/pull/832#issuecomment-888897400) where
there are scenarios in which only the ip pooling side of metallb is used, but the routes to those ips are set statically.

### Mixing nodes / target selection

A more complete scenario would mix the two configuration degrees described above, advertising the same pool to different peers depending
on the node the ip is being advertised from.

[<img src="./images/pool_peer_node_selector.svg" width="400"/>](./images/pool_peer_node_selector.svg)

No issues were raised but this combination is a more flexible variant of the [peer node selector](https://metallb.universe.tf/configuration/#limiting-peers-to-certain-nodes).

> With this combination, the user may choose a different set of targets depending on the node.

Reviewer 2: So node allocation and peer selection are kind of orthogonal. The exceptions are due to a node being unable to reach a peer. So where would we check for those exceptions? The webhook that you mention below?

Author: I think that is clearer in the examples below

There are two types of node selection here:

* The pool node selector drives which nodes are allowed to advertise the ip
* The node selector in the bgp peer of a given pool, tells that the ip must be advertised to that particular peer from a given subset of nodes

A webhook would be able to spot configurations with no intersections between the two selectors resulting in a pool that won't be advertised anywhere.

We need to implement an easy to understand and deterministic behaviour.

##### Non overlapping filters

Having an IP with no nodes advertising it is a risk. Some scenarios are:

* Traffic Policy Local with pods not running on the same nodes selected by the selector
* Node BGP peer selector with no intersection with the address selector

It should be possible to detect non overlapping configurations, and raise an event when they happen. The metallb operator introduces a Validation WebHook
that can be used to prevent those configurations to be created in first instance.

### Conflicts with discovery

The peer discovery feature currently being implemented in [this PR](https://github.com/metallb/metallb/pull/593) will introduce a way to
fetch peers from the node's annotations.

In order to be able to select them, the current proposed structure

```yaml
from-annotations:
      - my-asn: example.com/local-asn
        peer-asn: example.com/remote-asn
        peer-address: example.com/address
```

will need to be extended with a name field (as much as the `peers` substructure) so it can be selected.

### Conflicts with the FRR implementation

> All the BGP changes will happen from a "behavioural" point of view. Where needed, the changes will reflected in both the native and the new implementation.

Reviewer 2: I think the FRR design proposal discussed not adding features to the native implementation when we started development on FRR. It might be that we need to do only a little to enable it but I wouldn't let the native implementation be a blocker.

Author: Agree, I just have the feeling that all the implementation will happen above the bgp interface.

      peer-asn: 64501
      my-asn: 64500
      name: foo
    - peer-address: 10.0.0.1
      peer-asn: 64501
      my-asn: 64500
      name: bar
    address-pools:
    - name: default
      protocol: bgp
      addresses:
      - 198.51.100.0/24
      bgp-peers:
        - name: foo
        nodeSelector:
          matchLabels:
            network: first
        - name: bar
        nodeSelector:
          matchLabels:
            network: first
```

#### Implementation

A service using an ip from a pool with a list of bgp-peers will not advertise the ip to peers outside that list.

The BGP controller already contains a mapping between services and their BGP advertisement parameters taken from the address pool configuration.

The structure is being filled [here](https://github.com/metallb/metallb/blob/5d236989e61683daf1eaad00777b81ce7dd98c5d/speaker/bgp_controller.go#L218).

The idea here is to extend that with the list of peers that ip must be advertised to. In case the peer comes with a node selector, extra logic on the current node and the node selector will be in place to understand if to put the peer in the list of not.

### Pool / Service - Namespace association

> The association of the pool with a particular service is orthogonal to the previously described feature.

Reviewer 2: I am trying to convince myself of this statement :D. So, if I understand this correctly, if I assign an address pool to a particular service, we *can* reach that service from any node that has a backend for the service - this is regardless of what MetalLB does? .. which would seem to make them independent.

Author: This section is only about the way we associate the pool to a given service. Today is just random. The first pool that has free ips is associated to a given service [here](https://github.com/metallb/metallb/blob/997a177a762c6c8215ca9438083545529b675376/internal/allocator/allocator.go#L274).

Once we have an ip associated to the service, MetalLB will advertise it from a node that:
- has a speaker running (L2 only)
- in case of local traffic policy, has a running backend
- in case the node selector is implemented, the node must match the selector

This phase comes after the pool allocation to the service. 
The only relation I can see is that if a user cares about pinning a particular pool to a service (or to a namespace), the reason is likely because they want to leverage some of the extra tweakings that we are proposing here.

requested over time.

## Motivation

The way advanced users consume MetalLB is evolving and exposed a need for more complex configuration.
For example, the need for isolation and multi-tenancy induced requests for being able to advertise some specific address pools from a subset of the nodes, or
to allocate them only to a specific namespace, to mention some.

### Goals

* Collect and classify all the requests coming from different issues, in order to have a better understanding
  and an organic implementation, avoiding to focus on and to implement only a specific feature, risking to cause conflicts afterwards.
* Provide a list of the possible configuration enhancements, and to highlight dependencies and conflicts between each other (if any).
* Highlight the cases where the solution must be BGP or L2 specific

### Non-Goals

* Covering only a specific use case.
* Providing a L2 only or BGP only solution where the problem might be expressed in a more generic way.

## Proposal

For all the ips belonging to an address pool, we need to address three main points:

* Which nodes should advertise the ip
* To which BGP neighbors the IP address should be advertised

> * How to allocate that ip to a given service

Reviewer: Nit: Could we capitalize "IP" consistently throughout the document?

> The general idea of this proposal is that these degrees of configuration are all related to the AddressPool object, and

Reviewer: I find the term "degree" confusing in this context. Also, I suggest we choose one term for the three items in the list above and use that same term throughout the document (right now we call these items "points" and also "configuration degrees"). Using a single term reduces ambiguity.

that these configurations are independent between each other.

> ### Node / Address Pool mapping

Reviewer: I'm a bit confused. Does this title refer to the 1st "point" in the previous list, namely "Which nodes should advertise the ip"? If this title and the following ones are an elaboration on the previous list, could we use the same text for the "points" and the titles of the respective sections? If this title and the following ones are *not* an elaboration of the list, could we explain what these are (e.g. are these use cases? Feature requests? Something else?). In the latter case, how do these sections relate to the 3 "points" above?

Also, what does the `/` denote here? Could the slash be substituted with the word "to"? If there is directionality to the mapping, could use use `->` or something similar? If not, maybe `<>` would be better.

Author: I'll try to re-organize always using the same title.

> The most common request is being able to associate a given pool to a subset of nodes (which translates to selectively announce a subset of speakers to announce the ip from).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The most common request is being able to associate a given pool to a subset of nodes (which translates to selecting a subset of speakers so that these speakers - and only them - announce the IP).
```

I think there is a phrasing problem here.

> This covers use cases where different set of nodes are exposed to different subnets, and the loadbalancer IP can be reached only via a subset of the nodes.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This covers use cases where different sets of nodes have interfaces in different subnets, and the loadbalancer IP can be reached only via a subset of the nodes.
```

- I'm assuming you meant "different sets" and not "a different set" here.
- Let's make the term "exposed to" less ambiguous.

Author: Ugh I thought I accepted this

[<img src="./images/ip_per_node.svg" width="400"/>](./images/ip_per_node.svg)

This was raised in the following issues / PRs:

* [Issue: L2 Mode on k8s workers on different L2 segments](https://github.com/metallb/metallb/issues/511)
* [PR: Address Pool with node selector filtering](https://github.com/metallb/metallb/pull/502)
* [Issue: Layer 2: impossible to use MetalLB on a subset of Kubernetes nodes](https://github.com/metallb/metallb/issues/302)
* [Issue: Layer2 Different subnets(label for LB, check for interface](https://github.com/metallb/metallb/issues/737)
* [Issue: Look into a generic pool <> node affinity mechanism](https://github.com/metallb/metallb/issues/630)
* [PR: MetalLB speakers working on a subset of nodes in layer2](https://github.com/metallb/metallb/pull/613)
* [Issue: Annotate nodes with address pool/weighted address pools](https://github.com/metallb/metallb/issues/941)

The following issues also fall in the same "speaker announcement logic" category:

> Service with external backends

Reviewer: I don't understand the meaning of this line. Is it necessary? Does this line classify the two issues which follow? Could we reduce ambiguity here?

Author: It does, but those issues now closed and fixed by https://github.com/metallb/metallb/pull/976
Will remove it.

Here we want to choose what BGP peers a node should advertise the IP of the pool to:

[<img src="./images/pool_peer_selector.svg" width="400"/>](./images/pool_peer_selector.svg)

#### L2 Announcement logic

The L2 speaker currently responds to any request coming from connected interfaces (and sends gratuitous arps on all the connected interfaces when it needs to).

We could think about selectively choose what interfaces / clients send the replies / broadcasts to, but given the locality nature of the L2 mode, plus the fact that
no issues were raised for this scenario, this option won't be covered in this proposal.

#### No announcement

This third (currently not implemented) mode raised in [this discussion](https://github.com/metallb/metallb/pull/832#issuecomment-888897400) where
there are scenarios in which only the ip pooling side of metallb is used, but the routes to those ips are set statically.

On top of that, Calico suggests to deploy MetalLB without the speakers to leverage only the allocation feature exposed by the controller in
[its official documentation](https://docs.projectcalico.org/networking/advertise-service-ips).

### Mixing nodes / target selection

> A more complete scenario would mix the two configuration degrees described above, advertising the same pool to different peers depending

Reviewer: ```suggestion
A more complete scenario would mix the two configuration elements described above, advertising the same pool to different peers depending
```

See my previous comment about "degrees".

set custom properties only on one single service.

That aside, this proposal covers the majority of the issues that were raised by the users (multiple times), and it won't prevent to add a finer level of configuration
if ever comes the need.

## Design Details

### Node Selector

Extending the address-pool object with an optional node selector field is straightforward:

A configuration would look like:

```yaml
    peers:
    - peer-address: 10.0.0.1
      peer-asn: 64501
      my-asn: 64500
      name: foo
    - peer-address: 10.0.0.1
      peer-asn: 64501
      my-asn: 64500
      name: bar
    address-pools:
    - name: default
      protocol: bgp
      addresses:
      - 198.51.100.0/24
      nodeSelector:
        matchLabels:
          network: first
          network: second
```

#### Implementation

The [current implementation](https://github.com/metallb/metallb/blob/312b03cd3065687f25274486cd3ff5c79d6f6068/speaker/layer2_controller.go#L45) announces L2 pools only from those nodes
with a running speaker and an active endpoint for the service.

> In order to be able to announce L2 from a subset of nodes, this logic must be changed, checking for active endpoints only if the TrafficPolicy is local (which is handled by the [BGP implementation](https://github.com/metallb/metallb/blob/5d236989e61683daf1eaad00777b81ce7dd98c5d/speaker/bgp_controller.go#L153)).

Reviewer 4: checking for active endpoints only if the TrafficPolicy is local was done:
https://github.com/metallb/metallb/blob/36166169e7c804bd727cdfe19df6133b069c4b1b/speaker/layer2_controller.go#L100

Author: Yep, I did it after redacting this proposal. Removing it.

  Name              string
  Addresses         []string
  AvoidBuggyIPs     bool
  AutoAssign        *bool
}
```

Example CRD

```yaml
apiVersion: metallb.io/v1beta1
kind: AddressPool
metadata:
  name: addresspool-sample3
  namespace: metallb-system
spec:
  addresses:
    - 2002:2:2::1-2002:2:2::100
    - 172.20.0.100/24
  autoAssign: false
  avoidBuggyIPs: true

```

#### BGP Advertisement

The `BGPAdvertisement` entity represents the intention to advertise a given IP via the BGP Protocol. It contains properties related to the type of advertisement and a reference to the address pools we want we advertise. This initial version matches the current behaviour, where an IP is advertised to all the `BGPPeer`s configured in MetalLB.

```go
type bgpAdvertisement struct {
  Name              string
  Pools             []string
  PoolSelector      map[string]string
  AggregationLength *int
  LocalPref         *uint32
  Communities       []string
}
```

Example CRD:

```yaml
apiVersion: metallb.io/v1beta1
kind: BGPAdvertisement
metadata:
  name: bgpadvertisement
  namespace: metallb-system
spec:
    pools:
      - pool1
      - pool2
    peers:
      - peer1
      - peer2

>     - communities:

Reviewer 5: This looks like a yaml typo, `- communities` is a list element mixed in with an object.

        - 65535:65282
    aggregationLength: 32
    localPref: 100
```

> Open question: I would like to preserve not having to specify all the ips / peers in order to match the current "ease of configuration" of metallb. One possible way is to assume that all the pools are advertised to all the peers if no selection is specified, the other one is to provide an example using the label selector.

Reviewer 3: Big +1 to keep it easy!

spec:
    pools:
      - pool1
      - pool2
```

### BGP Peer

The `BgpPeer` entity represents an external BGP peer we want to establish a session with. It contains the properties of the sessions, and it's a 1:1 mapping of the current bgp peer structure without the node selector. We also add the `bfdProfile` structure here, as it is part of the session definition.

```go
type bgpPeer struct {
  Name              string
  MyASN         uint32
  ASN           uint32
  Addr          string
  SrcAddr       string
  Port          uint16
  HoldTime      string
  KeepaliveTime string
  RouterID      string
  Password      string
  BFDProfile    string
  EBGPMultiHop  bool
}

type bfdProfile struct {
  Name             string  
  ReceiveInterval  *uint32 
  TransmitInterval *uint32 
  DetectMultiplier *uint32 
  EchoInterval     *uint32 
  EchoMode         bool    
  PassiveMode      bool    
  MinimumTTL       *uint32 
}
```

Example CRDs:

```yaml
apiVersion: metallb.io/v1beta1
kind: BGPPeer
metadata:
  name: peer-bfd
  namespace: metallb-system
spec:
  peerAddress: 10.0.0.2
  peerASN: 64501
  myASN: 64500
  routerID: 10.10.10.10
  peerPort: 1
  holdTime: "10s"
  sourceAddress: 1.1.1.1

>   bfdProfile: bfdprofilefull

Reviewer 5: What's the reason for a separate `BFDProfile` resource?  Is it possible to associate a `BFDProfile` with multiple BGP peers?

Author: Yes, or to put it the other way around, multiple bgp peers can use the same profile. It's also the same way frr handles it, which is not a good enough reason BUT with a 1:1 mapping between a peer and its bfd settings, we'd have to create multiple bfd profiles in the frr configuration (and this does seemed reasonable).

Reviewer 5: Gotcha!  Yeah, I'm just trying to figure out if there's a way to prevent config sprawl.

apiVersion: metallb.io/v1beta1
kind: BFDProfile
metadata:

>   name: bfdprofiledefault

Reviewer 4: the name of the profile here is inconsistent with the name in the BGPPeer example above.

  namespace: metallb-system
spec:
  receiveInterval: 35
  transmitInterval: 35
  detectMultiplier: 37
  echoReceiveInterval: 38
  echoTransmitInterval: 39
  echoMode: true
  passiveMode: true
  minimumTtl: 10
```  

### New configuration degrees

#### Announcing the IP from a subset of nodes

The two Advertisement entities are extended with a selector of the nodes to announce from:

> A configuration would look like:

Reviewer 4: missing go structure (might be on purpose?)

        values: [hostA, hostB]
```

```yaml
apiVersion: metallb.io/v1beta1
kind: L2Advertisement
metadata:
  name: lsadvertisement
  namespace: metallb-system
spec:
    pools:
      - pool1
      - pool2
    nodeSelectors:
    - matchExpressions:
      - key: kubernetes.io/hostname
        operator: In
        values: [hostA, hostB]
```

#### Announcing the IP to a subset of BGP neighbors

This concern is now addressed by adding a peers selector to the `BGPAdvertisement` entity.
By using both the pools and the peers selector, it will be possible to declare the intent of announcing the IPs of a given `AddressPool` only to a subset of BGP peers,
and only from a subset of nodes.

```go
type bgpAdvertisement struct {
    Name              string
  Pools             []string
  Peers             []string
  PoolSelector      map[string]string
  PeerSelector      map[string]string
  AggregationLength *int
  LocalPref         *uint32
  Communities       []string
}
```

Example CRD:

```yaml
apiVersion: metallb.io/v1beta1
kGPd: BGPAdvertisement
metadata:
  name: bgpadvertisement
  namespace: metallb-system
spec:
    pools:
      - pool1
      - pool2
    peers:
      - peer1
      - peer2

>     - communities:

Reviewer 5: Ditto on the yaml typo, `- communities`

  Addresses         []string
  AvoidBuggyIPs     bool
  AutoAssign        *bool
  AllocateTo        serviceAllocation
}

type serviceAllocation struct {
  Priority          int
  Namespaces        []string
  NamespaceSelector map[string]string
  ServiceSelector   map[string]string
}
```

Example CRD

```yaml
apiVersion: metallb.io/v1beta1
kind: AddressPool
metadata:
  name: addresspool-sample3
  namespace: metallb-system
spec:
  addresses:
    - 2002:2:2::1-2002:2:2::100
    - 172.20.0.100/24
  autoAssign: false
  avoidBuggyIPs: true
  allocateTo:
    priority: 50
      namespaces:
        - namespaceA
        - namespaceB
      serviceSelector:
          tenant: foo
```

The controller will use the pool with highest priority in case of multiple matches. This is deterministic and will make the behaviour more clear to the users.

Open question: what to do in case a selective pool finishes the IPs? As a user, if I choose a given pool from my services, I'd rather not have the IP assigned than getting one
from another pool. One alternative is to keep this as default (i.e. if allocate-to is set and no IPs are available, do not go to the next pool). Another option is to have another

> flag that overrides this behaviour.

Reviewer 3: I think if allocate-to is set and there are no IPs available AND there are no other pools referenced in the {BGP,L2}Advertisement, I'd go with no have the IP assigned. I think I prefer that over the flag. But no strong feelings if you think otherwise.

Another option might be to make the edit of an `AddressPool` fail if they remove an IP that is currently allocated? In that way, they can create a new service (or delete and re-create) even with a specific IP selected, then remove this service and edit the AddressPool (this time won't fail, as the IP to remove is not allocated).

Maybe that is better? What do you think?

Author: The problem I want to address here is, what if we have two valid AddressPools, one with the selector and the priority field set, the other one with just the selector (or the selector but a lower priority).
In my opinion we must just fail, because the behaviour is predictable and the user expressed his willing to use a specific address pool for a given service. Otherwise it would be harder for them to understand how MetalLB is behaving.

I'll go with the failure approach.

Reviewer 3: Priority seems to be mandatory (it is an int, not an *int) so if the selector is present, a priority must be used (default 0?), right? I assume, then, it is the case with a lower priority you mentioned and not that other one.

Assuming that case, I'm not sure I'm missing something but just failing seems weird. LEt's say you have a namespace and 3 different address pools to use there. You _need_ to set a priority on all. Let's assume no two pool have the same priority (we would later need to address if having same prio is allowed or not), so you assign them all to one namespace.

The pool with highest prio runs out of IPs. Then, no new service will have an IP allocated. So, what is the point of having more address pools that are assigned to the namespace?

I guess it only makes sense to have several address pools assigned to one namespace if we also allow the prio to be the same. I don't think we should check any of this, just document whenever we write user-facing docs.

Or am I missing something @fedepaol ?

Reviewer 3: If that makes sense and we allow several address pool to use the same prio, then I think that it can work.

It seems it can be tricky the algorithm to decide which AddressPool to use to allocate when a new service is created. But I trust you have thought that too :)

Author: Priority has to be optional, because of the usual "keep it simple as long as we don't need complexity" logic.
What I am worried about here is a scenario where a user has some "special" pools for a namespace, and a bunch of other "regular" pools with no priority.

What I want to avoid is having the services in the special namespace pick an ip from the "regular" pools, that's why I am suggesting to fail.
But you are probably right, we can just document it and users will understand they had to put the right priorities and ranges in place. In that case, it will be a matter of changing the current logic to sort the pools by priority.

Reviewer 3: @fedepaol I mean, from the golang POV if that field is not a pointer, it will be 0 when not present. 0 might be a reasonable default, though.

I'm kind of confused, though. I'm sure I'm missing something. But if we add a priority field and only allocate from the pool with highest prio, what is the point of having the other address pools matching the same selector with lower prio?

I mean, I don't follow why we have a prio field if basically setting it means that only the higher prio will be used and the rest ignored (seems like an easy way to ignore the rest of the pools).

What am I missing?

Author: The point is, not having a selector currently means "select everything" (and we want to keep that).

With that in mind, you can have some "general pools" good for everything, and one namespace specific pool.
Also, the selector is a label selector, so it could be that we have a broader selector that also impacts (as a side effect) the "finer selected" pools.

An example:

Service A: label `important:true`, `notsoimportantbutimportant:true`
Service B: `notsoimportantbutimportant:true`
Service C

pool A -> selector: `important:true` , prio 100
pool B -> selector `notsoimportantbutimportant:true` (which includes some services collected by poolA), prio 50
pool C -> no selector

Reviewer 3: Ohh, thanks, that is what I was missing!

Just curious, is that a real use case or just what happens with all the other stuff? I mean, it seems intricate if it is an use case, I'm just curious.

It seems reasonable. Also, if we want the alternative "to allocate from any of poolA or pool B", then pool B needs to have prio 100 (or pool A and pool B no prio).

I guess what we can't express is "take IPs from this pool, only when that pool is empty use this other pool". And that seems like a reasonable thing to leave out, AFAIK. Either services can have more labels (to play with selectors) and the user can request an specific IP.

Thanks for the explanations!

Author: The real (and most common) use case is "I want to reserve some pools for some namespaces / services", and other pools to the rest.
The extra complication comes from the fact that we can have intersections in those selections, and if we allow them, it will be possible to incur in what I described.

In any case, documenting the priority and saying that we'll go on the next pool if the highest one is empty (instead of failing) is as much as reasonable, and I think it makes sense.

Author: @rata changed.

* Provide a list of the possible configuration enhancements and highlight dependencies and conflicts among them (if any).
* Highlight the cases where the solution must be BGP or L2 specific
* Provide a new version of the datamodel, splitting the configuration in different resources responsible to address different concerns, and
use that as a base for the new configuration degrees proposed in this document.

### Non-Goals

* Covering only a specific use case.
* Providing a L2 only or BGP only solution where the problem might be expressed in a more generic way.

## New data model

Before addressing the new concerns, we will propose a new scheme for configuring MetalLB, which will be used as a starting point
in the following parts of the proposal. For this reason, it makes sense to have it described in this proposal instead of a separate one.

The new data model will be expressed in terms of kubernetes CRDs, deprecating the configuration via the metallb's ConfigMap.

In the new data model, the following entities will be defined (more details on the implementation section):

* `AddressPool`, responsible of the ip allocation to services

> * `L2Advertisement`, describing the intention to advertise an IP coming from an `AddressPool` via L2

Reviewer: >the intention to advertise an IP

An IP or a **prefix**? If we're really separating IP allocation from advertisement, I assume I should be able to aggregate multiple IPs in a `BGPAdvertisement` as a `/28` for example.

of services. This is more flexible and moves the focus on the cluster administrator, who is setting the MetalLB configuration
in a multi tenant scenario.

This, in combination with the other configuration degrees above, will provide a way to have per service (or per namespace) behavior
 (i.e. specifying the communities for a given service).

The issues related to this arguments:

* [Issue: Pool affinity for Namespace](https://github.com/metallb/metallb/issues/383)
* [Issue: Feature request: addresses assignment outside of Service definition](https://github.com/metallb/metallb/issues/616)
* [Issue: allow selecting services to announce with the bgb speaker](https://github.com/metallb/metallb/issues/604)
* [Issue: Dynamic BGP communities from services](https://github.com/metallb/metallb/issues/934)

### Risks and Mitigations

#### Regressions

The e2e test suite is wide enough to ensure we have good coverage on metallb's main features. Given the new data model will be functionally equivalent
to the old one, converting the test suite should give us enough confidence in that regard.

> #### Impacts on the users' configurations

Reviewer: Nit: "impact" is normally used as singular.

Deprecating the configmap will have impacts on the users' current configurations. To mitigate this, we may consider having a controller that converts the configmap
into the CRDs, or provide some offline tool in charge of that (the latter option is more desirable, as it will remove the need of reconciling changes into the configmap).

#### Impacts on users currently using the MetalLB operator

The operator already exposes CRDs, mapped directly to the current configmap entitites.
Changing the CRDs layout will impact them, and in order to mitigate the behaviour, conversion webhooks will be implemented to support both the old and the new versions
of the API, until the old version is deprecated.

#### Bad configurations

##### Service allocation

> When a user specify both a pool to be allocated to a specific service and one with no selector, the service may receive an IP from the broader one.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
When a user specifies both a pool to be allocated to a specific service and a pool with no selector, the service may receive an IP from the broader pool.
```

Fix grammar and reduce ambiguity.

We need to implement an easy to understand and deterministic behaviour (see design details below).

##### Non overlapping filters

Having an IP with no nodes advertising it is a risk. Some scenarios are:

* Traffic Policy Local with pods not running on the same nodes selected by the selector
* Node BGP peer selector with no intersection with the address selector

It should be possible to detect non overlapping configurations, and raise an event when they happen. The metallb operator introduces a Validation WebHook

> that can be used to prevent those configurations to be created in first instance.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
that can be used to prevent those configurations from being created in first instance.
```

Reviewer: >in first instance

Did you mean "prevent from the start" or "prevent the 1st use case" (from the 2 cases mentioned above)?

> ### Conflicts with discovery

Reviewer: The main motivation for the peer autodiscovery feature was to provide a way for external entities to specify BGP configuration which MetalLB can pick up. With the introduction of CRDs, I'm wondering if it would make sense to let external entities (such as a Cloud Controller Manager) **create MetalLB CRs** instead of enriching `Node` objects.

Author: I'll add this consideration too, and if we move on with autodiscovery will take it into account.

The peer discovery feature currently being implemented in [this PR](https://github.com/metallb/metallb/pull/593) will introduce a way to
fetch peers from the node's annotations.

With this new structure, the PR will need to be adjusted to extend the `BGPPeer` entity in order to consume the node's annotations instead of hardcoded values.

### Conflicts with the FRR implementation

> All the BGP changes will happen from a "behavioural" point of view. Where needed, the changes will reflected in both the native and the new implementation.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
All the BGP changes will happen from a "behavioural" point of view. Where needed, the changes will be reflected in both the native and the new implementation.
```

### Not covering all the angles

The risk of not covering all possible cases / permutations is still there.

> That aside, this proposal covers the majority of the issues that were raised by the users (multiple times), and it won't prevent to add a finer level of configuration

Reviewer: ```suggestion
That aside, this proposal covers the majority of the issues that were raised by the users (multiple times), and it won't prevent adding a finer level of configuration
```

> if ever comes the need. Moreover, providing a straightforward way to separate concerns will make it easier to accomodate new changes, and it will be more clear where

Reviewer: ```suggestion
if the need ever arises. Moreover, providing a straightforward way to separate concerns will make it easier to accomodate new changes, and it will be more clear where
```

those new changes must be applied.

## Design Details

### New data model

Here we describe the new proposed data model in the form of Go structures, and non comprehensive sample CRDs.

#### AddressPool

The `AddressPool` is the entity responsible for the IP allocation part, regardless of how (and if) the ip is going to be advertised.

Hence, we keep the same structure but remove the bgpAdvertisement section and the Protocol field.

```go
type addressPool struct {
  Name              string
  Addresses         []string
  AvoidBuggyIPs     bool

>   AutoAssign        *bool

Reviewer: Why a bool *pointer*?

Author: That's because the default value of AutoAssign is true (it's already like that in the current configuration), so we need a pointer to express "the user did not fill it" vs "the user asked for a false autoassign"

Reviewer: Then why no pointer for `AvoidBuggyIPs`?

Author: Because avoidbuggyips default is false, so it's fine both if the user puts false or not specifies it.

}
```

> Example CRD

Reviewer: Nit: This is a **CR**, not a CRD.

```yaml
apiVersion: metallb.io/v1beta1
kind: AddressPool
metadata:
  name: addresspool-sample3
  namespace: metallb-system
spec:
  addresses:
    - 2002:2:2::1-2002:2:2::100
    - 172.20.0.100/24
  autoAssign: false
  avoidBuggyIPs: true

```

#### BGP Advertisement

The `BGPAdvertisement` entity represents the intention to advertise a given IP via the BGP Protocol. It contains properties related to the type of advertisement and a reference to the address pools we want we advertise. This initial version matches the current behaviour, where an IP is advertised to all the `BGPPeer`s configured in MetalLB.

```go
type bgpAdvertisement struct {
  Name              string
  Pools             []string

>   PoolSelector      map[string]string

Reviewer: Why do we have both `Pools` and `PoolSelector`? What is the difference between the two?

Author: My idea was to have both the simplicity of a list of names vs the flexibility of a label selector (which at this point can be expressed as `*metav1.LabelSelector`)

spec:
    pools:
      - pool1
      - pool2
    peers:
      - peer1
      - peer2
    - communities:
        - 65535:65282
    aggregationLength: 32
    localPref: 100
```

A `BGPAdvertisement` with no pool selector is intended to select all the available `AddressPool`s.

#### L2 Advertisement

The `L2Advertisement` entity represents the intention to advertise a given IP via L2. Currently, there are no knobs related to L2 advertisement.

```go
type l2Advertisement struct {
  Name              string
  Pools             []string
  PoolSelector      map[string]string
}
```

Example CRD:

```yaml
apiVersion: metallb.io/v1beta1
kind: L2Advertisement
metadata:
  name: lsadvertisement
  namespace: metallb-system
spec:
    pools:
      - pool1
      - pool2
```

A `L2Advertisement` with no pool selector is intended to select all the available `AddressPool`s.

### BGP Peer

The `BgpPeer` entity represents an external BGP peer we want to establish a session with. It contains the properties of the sessions, and it's a 1:1 mapping of the current bgp peer structure without the node selector. We also add the `bfdProfile` structure here, as it is part of the session definition.

```go

> type bgpPeer struct {

Reviewer: What if I want a BGP peer to be configured only on node X, regardless of which prefixes are being advertised? In other words, how do I affect which nodes would initiate TCP connections on port 179 towards this peer? This concern is especially important if we support the `SrcAddr` field which is almost certainly node specific.

Author: Then I'd create a BGP advertisement selecting all the pools, selecting only that particular BGP Peer AND the node selector I am proposing below.

  Name              string
  MyASN         uint32
  ASN           uint32
  Addr          string
  SrcAddr       string
  Port          uint16
  HoldTime      string
  KeepaliveTime string
  RouterID      string

>   Password      string

Reviewer: Following https://github.com/metallb/metallb/issues/408, I'm wondering if we should look into turning this field into a **secret ref** field from the start.

Author: I'd start with this version in order avoid adding even more load on this effort (as it's not a regression).
A new field with the secret name won't break the api.

Reviewer: >A new field with the secret name won't break the api.

But changing the type of the `Password` field will... and I'm not sure we want to have two ways of specifying passwords in the end.

Author: Yep, the effort should not be tremendous.
Changing it to `corev1.SecretRef`

>   BFDProfile    string

Reviewer: I'm wondering if this should be a string, given that we're referencing a proper k8s API object here whose existence should likely be validated by a webhook upon creation of the BGP peer.

Reviewer: Never mind, please disregard. I wasn't 100% clear on something here but now realize that all we need is reference a BFD profile name.

  TransmitInterval *uint32 
  DetectMultiplier *uint32 
  EchoInterval     *uint32 
  EchoMode         bool    
  PassiveMode      bool    
  MinimumTTL       *uint32 
}
```

Example CRDs:

```yaml
apiVersion: metallb.io/v1beta1
kind: BGPPeer
metadata:
  name: peer-bfd
  namespace: metallb-system
spec:
  peerAddress: 10.0.0.2
  peerASN: 64501
  myASN: 64500
  routerID: 10.10.10.10
  peerPort: 1
  holdTime: "10s"
  sourceAddress: 1.1.1.1
  bfdProfile: bfdprofilefull

apiVersion: metallb.io/v1beta1
kind: BFDProfile
metadata:
  name: bfdprofilefull
  namespace: metallb-system
spec:
  receiveInterval: 35
  transmitInterval: 35
  detectMultiplier: 37
  echoReceiveInterval: 38
  echoTransmitInterval: 39
  echoMode: true
  passiveMode: true
  minimumTtl: 10
```  

### New configuration degrees

#### Announcing the IP from a subset of nodes

The two Advertisement entities are extended with a selector of the nodes to announce from:

A configuration would look like:

```go
type bgpAdvertisement struct {
  Name              string
  Pools             []string
  PoolSelector      map[string]string
  AggregationLength *int
  LocalPref         *uint32
  Communities       []string

>   NodeSelector      *metav1.LabelSelector

Author: My bad, the peer selector was already in my mind (see the CR example above):
```
```yaml
apiVersion: metallb.io/v1beta1
kind: BGPAdvertisement
metadata:
  name: bgpadvertisement
  namespace: metallb-system
spec:
    pools:
      - pool1
      - pool2
    peers:
      - peer1
      - peer2
 ```

With your version, we won't be able to express the case where we want to advertise only some ips from a subset of the nodes.
That's because the BGP Peer must be unique (per peer) while we can have multiple bgpAdvertisements (and I notice now the peer part is missing from this struct, need to amend that).

>   NodeSelector      *metav1.LabelSelector

Author: Also, the config is simpler if the focus is advertising to different peers from different nodes.
The most common use case I can envision is to have a pool advertised to a subset of peers from a subset of nodes, which will be simpler with the current proposed version, compared to having to add a nodeselector to each peer.

>   NodeSelector      *metav1.LabelSelector

Author: As a second thought, I think we need the node selector BOTH on the bgp advertisement and on the bgp peer, because they express two different concepts.

The BGPPeer object expresses the desire to establish a BGP connection, the BGPAdvertisement expresses the desire to advertise a prefix via BGP. We need both because we may either want to connect to peers from a subset of nodes, and orthogonally we may want to advertise prefixes only from a subset of nodes.

The first one is on par with what we have right now, and even if we could get away with not having the selector in the bgppeer, that would result in wasted resources of metallb attempting to connect to a peer from a node that won't be able to reach it.

  namespace: metallb-system
spec:
    pools:
      - pool1
      - pool2
    peers:
      - peer1
      - peer2
    - communities:
        - 65535:65282
    aggregationLength: 32
    localPref: 100
```

#### Not announcing the IP

This concern will be addressed by defining an AddressPool not referenced by any Advertisement instance.

#### Using a given AddressPool only for a subset of services

The idea is to be able to reduce the scope of a particular AddressPool to a set of namespaces and services, by adding an optional namespace / service selector.

```go
type addressPool struct {
  Name              string
  Addresses         []string
  AvoidBuggyIPs     bool
  AutoAssign        *bool
  AllocateTo        serviceAllocation
}

type serviceAllocation struct {
  Priority          int
  Namespaces        []string
  NamespaceSelector map[string]string
  ServiceSelector   map[string]string
}
```

Example CRD

```yaml
apiVersion: metallb.io/v1beta1
kind: AddressPool
metadata:
  name: addresspool-sample3
  namespace: metallb-system
spec:
  addresses:
    - 2002:2:2::1-2002:2:2::100
    - 172.20.0.100/24
  autoAssign: false
  avoidBuggyIPs: true
  allocateTo:
    priority: 50

>       namespaces:

Reviewer: This is misaligned: `namespaces` is a key at the same level as `priority` AFAICT.

Author: good catch

>         - namespaceA

Reviewer: Should we allow flexible selection using labels/annotations?

        - namespaceB
      serviceSelector:
          tenant: foo
```

> The controller will use the pool with highest priority in case of multiple matches. This is deterministic and will make the behaviour more clear to the users.

Reviewer: "Higher is better" is counterintuitive to me. "Priority 1" is usually meant as "top priority". Also, lower is usually better in most routing-related matters (interface "metric", administrative distance, protocol-specific "cost" etc.). I'm aware there are exceptions but we probably want to go with the more common case.

Author: Fine, but not priority will still mean the lowest possible priority.

Reviewer: Yes, I guess that makes sense.

Also, I'm not saying reversing the logic is *necessarily* the way to go, I just shared **my** understanding of this. Would you rather go with "higher is better"?

Author: I don't have a strong opinion about that. I guess I was influenced by localpref which I dealt with just recently. As long as we document it, works for me.

## Drawbacks

This new logic may bring broader complexity while MetalLB is well known to work out of the box.

Besides that, all the additional selectors are optional, and the bare minimum configuration will continue to work.
Power users will be able to leverage this extra configurability for their more complex scenarios.

## Development Phases

### New Data Model

We expect two phases, moving the CRDs as they are from the metallb operator to metallb first, and changing the data model later.

#### CRD migration

The CRDs will be moved from the MetalLB operator to MetalLB as they are. The tests already have a "CRD" mode that will
make sure there are no (or limited :P) regressions.

The configmap will be deprecated.

The CRDs are removed from the operator, which is in charge of deploying metallb only.

#### CRD evolution

During the new data model implementation (described in the "New Data Model" section), the e2e tests will be adjusted to use the new data model, and eventually a converter (like the one for configmap mode / crd mode)
will be implemented to guarantee both the old and the new versions keep working.

> Conversion webhooks will be in place to guarantee backward compatibility for the current users of the MetalLB Operator.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Conversion webhooks will be put in place to guarantee backward compatibility for the current users of the MetalLB Operator.
```

### New configuration degrees

The remaining configuration degrees seem now to be independent:

* BGPAdvertisement peers selector

> * LsAdvertisement node selector

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* L2Advertisement node selector
```

in a multi tenant scenario.

This, in combination with the other configuration degrees above, will provide a way to have per service (or per namespace) behavior
 (i.e. specifying the communities for a given service).

The issues related to this arguments:

* [Issue: Pool affinity for Namespace](https://github.com/metallb/metallb/issues/383)
* [Issue: Feature request: addresses assignment outside of Service definition](https://github.com/metallb/metallb/issues/616)
* [Issue: allow selecting services to announce with the bgb speaker](https://github.com/metallb/metallb/issues/604)
* [Issue: Dynamic BGP communities from services](https://github.com/metallb/metallb/issues/934)

### Risks and Mitigations

#### Regressions

The e2e test suite is wide enough to ensure we have good coverage on metallb's main features. Given the new data model will be functionally equivalent
to the old one, converting the test suite should give us enough confidence in that regard.

#### Impact on the users' configurations

Deprecating the configmap will have impact on the users' current configurations. To mitigate this, we may consider having a controller that converts the configmap

> into the CRDs, or provide some offline tool in charge of that (the latter option is more desirable, as it will remove the need of reconciling changes into the configmap).

Reviewer 3: I guess this implies for at least for 1 release it will be possible to use CRDs or a configmap to configure metalLB (but not both), right?

Author: An automatic CLI converter could also help and possibly ease the transition, that's another option.

Reviewer 3: Thanks!

```go
type bgpAdvertisement struct {
  Name              string
  Pools             []string
  PoolSelector      *metav1.LabelSelector
  AggregationLength *int
  LocalPref         *uint32
  Communities       []string
}
```

Example CR:

```yaml
apiVersion: metallb.io/v1beta1
kind: BGPAdvertisement
metadata:
  name: bgpadvertisement
  namespace: metallb-system
spec:
    pools:
      - pool1
      - pool2
    - communities:
        - 65535:65282
    aggregationLength: 32
    localPref: 100
```

A `BGPAdvertisement` with no pool selector is intended to select all the available `AddressPool`s.

#### L2 Advertisement

The `L2Advertisement` entity represents the intention to advertise a given IP via L2. Currently, there are no knobs related to L2 advertisement.

```go
type l2Advertisement struct {
  Name              string
  Pools             []string
  PoolSelector      *metav1.LabelSelector
}
```

Example CR:

```yaml
apiVersion: metallb.io/v1beta1
kind: L2Advertisement
metadata:

>   name: lsadvertisement

Reviewer 6: nit: l2advertisement

  name: bfdprofilefull
  namespace: metallb-system
spec:
  receiveInterval: 35
  transmitInterval: 35
  detectMultiplier: 37
  echoReceiveInterval: 38
  echoTransmitInterval: 39
  echoMode: true
  passiveMode: true
  minimumTtl: 10
```  

### New configuration degrees

#### Announcing the IP from a subset of nodes

The two Advertisement entities are extended with a selector of the nodes to announce from:

A configuration would look like:

```go
type bgpAdvertisement struct {
  Name              string
  Pools             []string
  PoolSelector      *metav1.LabelSelector
  AggregationLength *int
  LocalPref         *uint32
  Communities       []string
  NodeSelector      *metav1.LabelSelector
}
```

```go
type l2Advertisement struct {
  Name              string
  NodeSelector      *metav1.LabelSelector
}
```

```yaml
apiVersion: metallb.io/v1beta1
kind: BGPAdvertisement
metadata:
  name: bgpadvertisement
  namespace: metallb-system
spec:
    pools:
      - pool1
      - pool2
    nodeSelector:
    - matchExpressions:
      - key: kubernetes.io/hostname
        operator: In
        values: [hostA, hostB]
```

```yaml
apiVersion: metallb.io/v1beta1
kind: L2Advertisement
metadata:

>   name: lsadvertisement

Reviewer 6: nit: l2advertisement
